Flesh out the Gate Modifiers section (#15)
rigetti/quil: spec/Quil.md

**Gate Modifiers**

```
<modified gate> ::= <simple gate>
                  | <parametric gate>
                  | CONTROLLED <modified gate>
                  | DAGGER <modified gate>
                  | FORKED <modified gate>
```

Gates can be modified by one of the modifier keywords `CONTROLLED`, `DAGGER`, or
`FORKED`. The meaning of these modifiers is as follows:

**`CONTROLLED`**

> The `CONTROLLED` modifier takes some gate G acting on some number of qubits

Reviewer: I would write something like:

```
G q0 ... qn
=>
CONTROLLED c1 q0 ... qn
```
formatted nicely somewhere. This makes it absolutely clear what and where this addl qubit is.

Author: Good idea. Done.

q1...qn and makes it conditioned on the state of some new qubit q. Therefore, if
G is an n-qubit gate, then `CONTROLLED G` is an (n+1)-qubit gate. For example,
the gate `CONTROLLED X 1 0` is the familiar controlled not gate, which can also
be written using the standard built-in Quil gate `CNOT 1 0`.

Specifically, when acting on a gate G that can be represented as an N x N matrix
U, `CONTROLLED G` produces a gate G' described by the 2N x 2N matrix C(U) such
that C(U) = I (+) U, where I is the N x N identity matrix and (+) is a direct
sum. For example, if U is the 2 x 2, 1-qubit operator

```
[ a b ]
[ c d ]
```

Then C(U) is

```
[ 1 0 0 0 ]
[ 0 1 0 0 ]
[ 0 0 a b ]
[ 0 0 c d ]
```

**`DAGGER`**

The `DAGGER` modifier represents the adjoint operation or complex-conjugate

> transpose. For example, if G is a gate described by the 1-qubit operator

Reviewer: >For unitary operators, which all gates are, this is the inverse.

(or something like so)

Author: Done. Let me know what u think.

```
[ a b ]
[ c d ]
```

Then `DAGGER G` is

```
[ a* c* ]
[ b* d* ]
```

> where `a*` is the complex-conjugate of `a`.

Reviewer: Give an example!

```
G q1 ... qn
DAGGER G q1 ... qn
```
is always an identity.

```
RX(-theta) q
===
DAGGER RX(theta) q
```

Just makin things up.

Author: Done and done.

Author: Switched it to `RZ` though, since the `DEFGATE` form is simpler.

**`FORKED`**

> The `FORKED` modifier takes a gate G on some number of qubits q0...qn and

Reviewer: Let G be a parametric gate of k parameters p1 ... pk and n qubits q1 ... qn. This is written:
```
G(p1, ..., pk) q1 ... qn
```
Consider a second set of k parameters p1', ... pk'. The `FORKED` modifier takes such a gate G and allows either set of parameters to be used conditioned on an additional qubit c.
```
FORKED G(p1, ..., pn, p1', ..., pn') c q1 ... qn
```
Roughly speaking, this is equivalent to the pseudocode:
```
if c = 0:
    G(p1, ..., pn) q1 ... qn
else c = 1:
    G(p1', ..., pn') q1 ... qn
```

---
Just some ideas.

Author: I liked this so much I straight up plagiarized. ty.

P.S. I switched from zero-based to one-based indexing on the qubits at some points and must have missed this one, good :eye:

"forks" it, conditioned on some new qubit q. Therefore, if G is an n-qubit gate,

> then `FORKED G` is an (n+1)-qubit gate.

Reviewer: As I understand, `FORKED G c q` == `I c / G q`. @ecpeterson ?

version of `RX`, conditioned on qubit 1. The "left" fork corresponds to
`RX(pi/2) 0` and the "right" fork to `RX(pi/4) 0`.

In general, when acting on a gate G that can be represented as an N x N matrix U
= G(p1,...,pN), `FORKED G` produces a 2N x 2N matrix F(G)(p1,...,p2N) =
G(p1,...,pN) (+) G(pN+1,...,2N), where (+) is the direct sum. For example, when N=0 and U is the 2 x 2, 1-qubit operator

```
[ a b ]
[ c d ]
```

Then F(U) is

```
[ a b 0 0 ]
[ c d 0 0 ]
[ 0 0 a b ]
[ 0 0 c d ]
```

Likewise if `MY-RZ` is defined as

```
DEFGATE MY-RZ(%theta):
    cis(-%theta/2), 0
    0,              cis(%theta/2)
```

Then `FORKED MY-RZ(x1, x2) 1 0` (for some real numbers x1 and x2) results in a 2-qubit operator that can be described by the matrix.

```
[ cis(-x1/2), 0,         0,          0         ]
[ 0,          cis(x1/2), 0,          0         ]
[ 0,          0,         cis(-x2/2), 0         ]
[ 0,          0,         0,          cis(x2/2) ]
```

**Chaining gate modifiers**

When gate modifiers are chained, they consume qubits left-to-right, so that in
the following example, the `CONTROLLED` modifier is conditioned on qubit 0,
`FORKED` on qubit 1, and the gate G acts on qubit 2.

```

> CONTROLLED FORKED DAGGER G 0 1 2

Reviewer: cool diagram

Author: `M-x picture-mode` ftw

**`FORKED`**

Let G be a parametric gate of k parameters p1 ... pk and n qubits
q1 ... qn. This is written:

```
G(p1, ..., pk) q1 ... qn
```

Consider a second set of k parameters p1' ... pk'. The `FORKED` modifier takes
such a gate G and allows either set of parameters to be used conditioned on an
additional qubit c.

```
FORKED G(p1, ..., pk, p1', ..., pk') c q1 ... qn
```

Roughly speaking, this is equivalent to the pseudocode:

```
if c = 0:
    G(p1, ..., pk) q1 ... qn
else c = 1:
    G(p1', ..., pk') q1 ... qn
```

For example, the built-in gate `RX` takes a single `%theta` parameter and acts
on a single qubit, like so `RX(pi/2) 0`. Therefore, `FORKED RX(pi/2, pi/4) 1 0`
produces a "forked" version of `RX`, conditioned on qubit 1. If qubit 1 is in
the zero state, this corresponds to `RX(pi/2) 0` and to `RX(pi/4) 0` if qubit 1
is in the one state.

In general, when acting on a gate G that can be represented as an N x N matrix U
= G(p1,...,pk), `FORKED G` produces a 2N x 2N matrix F(G)(p1,...,p2k) =
G(p1,...,pk) (+) G(pk+1,...,p2k), where (+) is the direct sum. For example, when
N=0 and U is the 2 x 2, 1-qubit operator (why won't github let me comment on a

> line with no diff?)

Author: This paragraph and everything below is now kinda redundant.  Plus, I might just be confusing things / people (myself included) by talking about matrices. Delete?

Maybe the same applies to matrix examples for `CONTROLLED` and `DAGGER`, above...

Reviewer: no it's good, seeing the matrix is helpful

**Gate Modifiers**

```
<modified gate> ::= <simple gate>
                  | <parametric gate>
                  | CONTROLLED <modified gate>
                  | DAGGER <modified gate>
                  | FORKED <modified gate>
```

Gates can be modified by one of the modifier keywords `CONTROLLED`, `DAGGER`, or
`FORKED`.

Examples:

```
CONTROLLED Z 0 1 # same as CZ 0 1
CONTROLLED X 0 1 # same as CNOT 0 1
CONTROLLED CONTROLLED X 0 1 2 # same as CCNOT 0 1 2

DAGGER RX(pi/2) 0
FORKED RX(pi/2, pi/4) 0 1

DAGGER FORKED CONTROLLED RZ(0, pi) 0 1 2
```

The meaning of the modifiers is as follows:

**`CONTROLLED`**

The `CONTROLLED` modifier takes some gate G acting on some number of qubits

> q1...qn and makes it conditioned on the state of some new qubit c1. Therefore,

Reviewer 2: I'd expand what the word "conditioned" means.
> ... conditioned on the state of some new qubit `c1`: if `c1` is high, `G` is applied to `q1, ..., qn`; and if `c1` is low, no operation is applied.

Reviewer 2: (This is spelled out in the formulas below, but it doesn't hurt to say it right out here.)

The `DAGGER` modifier represents the adjoint operation or complex-conjugate
transpose. Since every gate is a unitary operator, this is just the inverse. For
example, if G is a gate described by the 1-qubit operator

```
[ a b ]
[ c d ]
```

Then `DAGGER G` is

```
[ a* c* ]
[ b* d* ]
```

where `a*` is the complex-conjugate of `a`.

Because `DAGGER` is an inverse, the sequence of Quil instructions

```
G q1 ... qn
DAGGER G q1 ... qn
```

acts as an identity gate. As another example, consider the gate `PHASE`, which
is defined as

```
DEFGATE PHASE(%alpha):
    1, 0
    0, cis(%alpha)
```

where `cis(x) = cos(x) + i sin(x) = e^{ix}`. Therefore, `PHASE(theta) q` ==
`DAGGER PHASE(-theta) q` for all `theta`.

**`FORKED`**

Let G be a parametric gate of k parameters p1 ... pk and n qubits
q1 ... qn. This is written:

```
G(p1, ..., pk) q1 ... qn
```

Consider a second set of k parameters p1' ... pk'. The `FORKED` modifier takes
such a gate G and allows either set of parameters to be used conditioned on an
additional qubit c.

```
FORKED G(p1, ..., pk, p1', ..., pk') c q1 ... qn
```

Roughly speaking, this is equivalent to the pseudocode:

```
if c = 0:
    G(p1, ..., pk) q1 ... qn

> else c = 1:

Reviewer 2: `elif` or so

    G(p1', ..., pk') q1 ... qn
```

For example, the built-in gate `RX` takes a single `%theta` parameter and acts
on a single qubit, like so `RX(pi/2) 0`. Therefore, `FORKED RX(pi/2, pi/4) 1 0`
produces a "forked" version of `RX`, conditioned on qubit 1. If qubit 1 is in
the zero state, this corresponds to `RX(pi/2) 0` and to `RX(pi/4) 0` if qubit 1
is in the one state.

In general, when acting on a gate G that can be represented as an N x N matrix U
= G(p1,...,pk), `FORKED G` produces a 2N x 2N matrix F(G)(p1,...,p2k) =
G(p1,...,pk) (+) G(pk+1,...,p2k), where (+) is the direct sum. For example, when

> N=0 and U is the 2 x 2, 1-qubit operator

Reviewer 2: There's some confusion here between `k` (the number of parameters) and `N` (the number of matrix columns): the number of columns isn't zero.

Author: Good eye.

Reviewer 2: putting my phd in index wrangling to use

**`CONTROLLED`**

The `CONTROLLED` modifier takes some gate G acting on some number of qubits
q1...qn and makes it conditioned on the state of some new qubit c1. Therefore,
if G is an n-qubit gate

```
G q1 ... qn
```

then `CONTROLLED G` is an (n+1)-qubit gate

```
CONTROLLED G c1 q1 ... qn
```

For example, the gate `CONTROLLED X 1 0` is the familiar controlled not gate,
which can also be written using the standard built-in Quil gate `CNOT 1 0`.

Specifically, when acting on a gate G that can be represented as an N x N matrix
U, `CONTROLLED G` produces a gate G' described by the 2N x 2N matrix C(U) such
that C(U) = I (+) U, where I is the N x N identity matrix and (+) is a direct
sum. For example, if U is the 2 x 2, 1-qubit operator

```
[ a b ]
[ c d ]
```

Then C(U) is

```
[ 1 0 0 0 ]
[ 0 1 0 0 ]
[ 0 0 a b ]
[ 0 0 c d ]
```

**`DAGGER`**

The `DAGGER` modifier represents the adjoint operation or complex-conjugate
transpose. Since every gate is a unitary operator, this is just the inverse. For
example, if G is a gate described by the 1-qubit operator

```
[ a b ]
[ c d ]
```

Then `DAGGER G` is

```
[ a* c* ]
[ b* d* ]
```

where `a*` is the complex-conjugate of `a`.

> More concretely, the sequence of Quil instructions

Reviewer: "Because DAGGER is an inverse, the sequence..."

```
G q1 ... qn
DAGGER G q1 ... qn
```

> is always an identity since UU† = U†U = I for any unitary U. As another example,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
acts as an identity gate. As another example,
```

> consider the gate `RZ`, which is defined as

Reviewer: how about using the `PHASE` gate instead?

Author: :heart: it. Done.

```
G(p1, ..., pk) q1 ... qn
```

Consider a second set of k parameters p1' ... pk'. The `FORKED` modifier takes
such a gate G and allows either set of parameters to be used conditioned on an
additional qubit c.

```
FORKED G(p1, ..., pk, p1', ..., pk') c q1 ... qn
```

Roughly speaking, this is equivalent to the pseudocode:

```
if c = 0:
    G(p1, ..., pk) q1 ... qn
else c = 1:
    G(p1', ..., pk') q1 ... qn
```

For example, the built-in gate `RX` takes a single `%theta` parameter and acts
on a single qubit, like so `RX(pi/2) 0`. Therefore, `FORKED RX(pi/2, pi/4) 1 0`
produces a "forked" version of `RX`, conditioned on qubit 1. If qubit 1 is in
the zero state, this corresponds to `RX(pi/2) 0` and to `RX(pi/4) 0` if qubit 1
is in the one state.

In general, when acting on a gate G that can be represented as an N x N matrix U
= G(p1,...,pk), `FORKED G` produces a 2N x 2N matrix F(G)(p1,...,p2k) =
G(p1,...,pk) (+) G(pk+1,...,p2k), where (+) is the direct sum. For example, when
N=0 and U is the 2 x 2, 1-qubit operator (why won't github let me comment on a
line with no diff?)

```
[ a b ]
[ c d ]
```

Then F(U) is

```
[ a b 0 0 ]
[ c d 0 0 ]
[ 0 0 a b ]
[ 0 0 c d ]
```

> Likewise if `MY-RZ` is defined as

Reviewer: you can just state RZ, not MY-RZ

```
DEFGATE MY-RZ(%theta):
    cis(-%theta/2), 0
    0,              cis(%theta/2)
```

Then `FORKED MY-RZ(x1, x2) 1 0` (for some real numbers x1 and x2) results in a
2-qubit operator that can be described by the matrix.

```
[ cis(-x1/2), 0,         0,          0         ]
[ 0,          cis(x1/2), 0,          0         ]
[ 0,          0,         cis(-x2/2), 0         ]
[ 0,          0,         0,          cis(x2/2) ]
```

> **Chaining gate modifiers**

Reviewer: how about a short note on multiple FORKED?

Author: I started to write this, then realized it's an after-lunch task. Added it to my TODO list, above.

Author: very very late lunch

Author: Added a little something

[ 0 0 c d ]
```

Likewise the gate `RZ` is defined as

```
DEFGATE RZ(%theta):
    cis(-%theta/2), 0
    0,              cis(%theta/2)
```

> Therefore, `FORKED MY-RZ(x1, x2) 1 0` (for some real numbers x1 and x2) results

Author: Done. See #16

_See [`typed-memory.md`](typed-memory.md) for classical operations._

```

> ClassicalInstruction := LABEL <label>

Author: I'm probably mixing up the grammar syntax for terminals vs non-terminals, `:=` vs `::`, `Foo` vs `<foo>`, etc.  Let me know if I got something wrong.

Reviewer: there are the classical instructions in typed-memory.md

Author: Yeah, I saw those. I mostly wanted this `ClassicalInstruction` grammar term in order to reference it in the `DEFCIRCUIT`, below. Based on your feedback there, maybe I will just abbreviate the definition of `DEFCIRCUIT` to say "any instruction" and drop this change.

Author: I removed the `ClassicalInstruction` label here, and went with abbreviating in `CircuitDefinition` below, per your suggestion.

                      | JUMP <label>
                      | JUMP-WHEN <label> <bit-mem>
                      | JUMP-UNLESS <label> <bit-mem>
                      | HALT
                      | WAIT
```

**Labels**

```
Label :: @Name
```

Locations within the instruction sequence are denoted by labels, which are names
that are prepended with an `@` symbol, like `@START`. The declaration of a new
label within the instruction sequence is called a jump target, and is written
with the `LABEL` directive.

> 

Reviewer: "Labels are used as targets in JUMP-like instructions."

```
PRAGMA <word> <word>* "string"?
```

## 7. Circuits

**Circuit Definitions**

```

> CircuitDefinition :: DEFCIRCUIT Name ( Parameter+ )? Qubit* : CircuitRow+

Reviewer: Qubit can actually be qubits or classical memory refs

Author: Updated based on what I found in `grammar/Quil.g4`. Let me know what you think.

CircuitRow :: Indent CircuitInstruction

> CircuitInstruction :: Comment

Reviewer: I would abbreviate or so here. A circuit instruction is any regular instruction possibly with variables.

Author: Are you saying to drop the laundry-list of `CircuitInstruction`s, and just include some text below explaining that any Quil instruction +variable substitution is allowed?

Initially I was going to just abbreviate to some undefined `Instruction` here, but then realized that, e.g., memory declarations are apparently verboten. Likewise `INCLUDE` (but that one might just be a bug).

Author: done

                    | ClassicalInstruction
                    | <modified gate>
                    | <modified circuit>
                    | Measurement
                    | RESET
                    | PRAGMA
```

Sometimes it is convenient to name and parameterize a particular sequence of
Quil instructions for use as a subroutine to other quantum programs. This can be
done with the `DEFCIRCUIT` directive. Similar to the `DEFGATE` directive,
`DEFCIRCUIT` can optionally specify a list of parameters. Additionally,
`DEFCIRCUIT` directives may specify a list of formal arguments which can be
substituted with either classical addresses or qubits.

Examples:
```
DEFCIRCUIT SIMPLE:
    X 0
    X 1

DEFCIRCUIT BELL_STATE q0 q1:
    H q0
    CNOT q0 q1

> DEFCIRCUIT LOOP:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
DEFCIRCUIT LOOP temp:
```

    LABEL @START
    RESET 0
    RESET 1
    BELL_STATE 0 1

>     # The following two instructions assume that the ro memory region has been

Reviewer: delete comment

    # declared elsewhere. See the section "Classical Memory Declarations",
    # above, for details on how to declare memory.

>     MEASURE 1 ro[0]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    MEASURE 1 temp
```

>     JUMP-WHEN @START ro[0]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    JUMP-WHEN @START temp
```

    HALT

DEFCIRCUIT ROT(%theta) q:
    RX(%theta) q
```

**Simple Circuits**

```
SimpleCircuit :: Name Qubit*
```

Circuit applications in Quil are written one per line with the name of the circuit preceding a list of zero or more qubits that the circuit acts upon.

Examples:
```
DEFCIRCUIT MY-RESET:
    RESET 0
    RESET 1

DEFCIRCUIT BELL_STATE q0 q1:
    H q0
    CNOT q0 q1

MY-RESET
BELL_STATE 0 1
```

**Parametric Circuits**

```
ParametricCircuit :: Name ( Expression+ ) Qubit*
```

A parametric circuit can take a certain number of parameters in addition to any

> formal qubit arguments. The application of this circuit is written as the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
formal arguments. The application of this circuit is written as the
```
